# Teaching Tech Together

Hundreds of grassroots groups have sprung up around the world to teach
programming, web design, robotics, and other skills to free-range
learners outside traditional classrooms. These groups exist so that
people don't have to learn these things on their own, but ironically,
their founders and instructors are often teaching themselves how to
teach.

There's a better way. Just as knowing a few basic facts about germs
and nutrition can help you stay healthy, knowing a few things about
psychology, instructional design, inclusivity, and community
organization can help you be a more effective teacher. This book
presents evidence-based practices you can use right now, explains why
we believe they are true, and points you at other resources that will
help you go further. Its four sections cover:

- how people learn;
- how to design lessons that work;
- how to deliver those lessons; and
- how to grow a community of practice around teaching.

This book is a community resource, and contributions of all kinds are
welcome, from errata and minor improvements to entirely new sections
and chapters.  Parts of it were originally created for the Software
Carpentry instructor training program, which has been run over several
hundred times over the past six years, and all of it can be freely
distributed and re-used under the Creative Commons - Attribution 4.0
license. Please see <http://teachtogether.tech> to download a digital
version or purchase a printed copy at cost.
